A.5: Zinc supplements 


RECOMMENDATION A.5: Zinc supplementation for pregnant women is only recommended in the context of rigorous research. (Context-specific recommendation – research) 


Remarks • Many of the included studies were at risk of bias, which influenced the certainty of the review evidence on the effects of zinc supplementation. • The low-certainty evidence that zinc supplementation may reduce preterm birth warrants further investigation, as do the other outcomes for which the evidence is very uncertain (e.g. perinatal mortality, neonatal sepsis), particularly in zinc-deficient populations with no food fortification strategy in place. Further research should aim to clarify to what extent zinc supplementation competes with iron and/or calcium antenatal supplements for absorption. The GDG considered that food fortification may be a more cost–effective strategy and that more evidence is needed on the cost–effectiveness of food fortification strategies. Summary of evidence and considerations Effects of zinc supplements compared with no zinc supplements (EB Table A.5) The evidence was derived from a Cochrane review that included 21 trials involving more than 17 000 women (64). Most studies were conducted in LMICs, including Bangladesh, Chile, China, Egypt, Ghana, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Nepal, Pakistan, Peru and South Africa. Six trials were conducted in Denmark, the United Kingdom and the USA. Daily zinc supplementation was compared with no intervention or placebo. There was a wide variation among trials in terms of trial size (range: 56–4926 women), zinc dosage (range: 5–90 mg per day), nutritional and zinc status at trial entry, initiation and duration of supplementation (starting before conception in one trial, first or second trimester in the majority, or after 26 weeks of gestation in two trials, until delivery), and compliance with treatment. Maternal outcomes Moderate-certainty evidence indicates that zinc supplementation probably makes little or no difference to the risk of any maternal infections (3 trials, 1185 women; RR: 1.06; 95% CI: 0.74–1.53). The evidence on caesarean section, pre-eclampsia and side effects (maternal taste and smell dysfunction) is of very low certainty, and the review did not include anaemia, maternal mortality or maternal satisfaction as review outcomes. Fetal and neonatal outcomes Moderate-certainty evidence indicates that zinc supplementation probably makes little or no difference to the risk of having SGA (8 trials, 4252 newborns; RR: 1.02; 95% CI: 0.94–1.11) or low-birth weight neonates (14 trials, 5643 neonates; RR: 0.93, 95% CI: 0.78–1.12). However, low-certainty evidence suggests that zinc supplementation may reduce preterm birth (16 trials, 7637 women; RR: 0.86, 95% CI: 0.76–0.97), particularly in women with presumed low zinc intake or poor nutrition (14 trials, 7099 women; RR: 0.87, 95% CI: 0.77–0.98). Low-certainty evidence suggests that zinc sup ple ment ation may have little or no effect on congenital anomalies (6 trials, 1240 newborns; RR: 0.67, 95% CI: 0.33–1.34) and macrosomia (defined in the review as “high birth weight”; 5 trials, 2837 neonates; RR: 1.00, 95% CI: 0.84–1.18). Evidence on perinatal mortality and neonatal sepsis is of very low certainty. Additional considerations The trials were clinically heterogeneous, therefore it is unclear what dose and timing of zinc supplementation, if any, might lead to a possible reduction in preterm birth. There is little or no evidence on side effects of zinc supplementation. In addition, it is unclear to what extent zinc might compete with iron and/or calcium for absorption. Maternal anaemia was not evaluated in the review. Values Please see “Women’s values” in section 3.A: Background (p. 15). Resources Zinc costs approximately US$ 1.30 for 100 tablets of 20 mg (i.e. less than US$ 3.00 for a 6-month supply based on a daily dose of 20 mg) (27). Chapter 3. Evidence and recommendations 31 Equity Effective interventions to improve maternal nutrition in disadvantaged populations could help to address health inequalities. A WHO report shows that inequalities in neonatal, infant and child mortality, as well as stunting prevalence, can be demonstrated according to economic status, education and place of residence in LMICs. The prevalence of stunting may be a good indicator of zinc deficiency in LMICs (39). Acceptability Qualitative evidence suggests that women in a variety of settings tend to view ANC as a source of knowledge and information and they generally appreciate any professional advice (including dietary or nutritional) that may lead to a healthy baby and a positive pregnancy experience (high confidence in the evidence) (22). Feasibility It may be more feasible to fortify food with zinc rather than to provide zinc as a single supplement, particularly in settings with a high prevalence of stunting in children