A. Nutritional interventions


Background


Pregnancy requires a healthy diet that includes an adequate intake of energy, protein, vitamins and minerals to meet maternal and fetal needs. However, for many pregnant women, dietary intake of vegetables, meat, dairy products and fruit is often insufficient to meet these needs, particularly in lowand middle-income countries (LMICs) where multiple nutritional deficiencies often co-exist. In resourcepoor countries in sub-Saharan Africa, south-central and south-east Asia, maternal undernutrition is highly prevalent and is recognized as a key determinant of poor perinatal outcomes (31). However, obesity and overweight is also associated with poor pregnancy outcomes and many women in a variety of settings gain excessive weight during pregnancy. While obesity has historically been a condition associated with affluence, there is some evidence to suggest a shift in the burden of overweight and obesity from advantaged to disadvantaged populations (32). Anaemia is associated with iron, folate and vitamin A deficiencies. It is estimated to affect 38.2% of pregnant women globally, with the highest prevalence in the WHO regions of South-East Asia (48.7%) and Africa (46.3%), medium prevalence in the Eastern Mediterranean Region (38.9%) and the lowest prevalence in the WHO regions of the Western Pacific (24.3%), the Americas (24.9%) and Europe (25.8%) (33). Major contributory factors to anaemia include parasitic infections such as malaria, hookworm and schistosomiasis, in areas where these infections are endemic. In addition, chronic infections such as tuberculosis (TB) and HIV, and haemoglobinopathies such as sickle-cell disease, contribute to the prevalence of anaemia. It is estimated that 0.8 million pregnant women globally have severe anaemia (defined as a blood haemoglobin concentration < 70 g/L) (33). In pregnancy, severe anaemia is associated with an increased risk of maternal and infant mortality (34). It is estimated that about half of the anaemia found in pregnant women is amenable to iron supplementation (33); however, this may be quite variable and is likely to be much lower in malaria-endemic areas. In addition to causing anaemia, iron deficiency adversely affects the use of energy sources by muscles and, thus, physical capacity and work performance, and also adversely affects immune status and morbidity from infections (35). Folate (vitamin B9) deficiency, in addition to anaemia it is also linked to fetal neural tube defects (36). Vitamin A deficiency affects about 19 million pregnant women, mostly in Africa and South-East Asia, causing night blindness (37). Calcium deficiency is associated with an increased risk of pre-eclampsia (38), and deficiencies of other vitamins and minerals, such as vitamin E, C, B6 and zinc, have also been postulated to play a role in pre-eclampsia. Zinc deficiency is associated with impaired immunity (39). Vitamin C intake enhances iron absorption from the gut; however, zinc, iron and other mineral supplements may compete for absorption, and it is unclear whether such interactions have health consequences (39). For the ANC guideline, the GDG evaluated the evidence on various vitamin and mineral supplements that might theoretically lead to improved maternal and perinatal outcomes. In addition, as both undernourishment and overnourishment may have negative consequences for pregnant women and their babies, the GDG also evaluated evidence on the effects of various dietary interventions to reduce the impact of these conditions. Caffeine is possibly the most widely used psychoactive substance in the world (40), and the GDG also evaluated evidence on the impact, if any, of caffeine restriction during pregnancy.


Women’s values
A scoping review of what women want from ANC and what outcomes they value informed the ANC guideline (13). Evidence showed that women from high-, medium- and low-resource settings valued having a positive pregnancy experience, the components of which included the provision of effective clinical practices (interventions and tests, including nutritional supplements), relevant and timely information (including dietary and nutritional advice) and psychosocial and emotional support, by knowledgeable, supportive and respectful health-care practitioners, to optimize maternal and newborn health (high confidence in the evidence).




A.1: Dietary interventions


 A1.1: Counselling on healthy eating and physical activity


RECOMMENDATION A.1.1: Counselling about healthy eating and keeping physically active during pregnancy is recommended for pregnant women to stay healthy and to prevent excessive weight gain during pregnancy. (Recommended)


Remarks • A healthy diet contains adequate energy, protein, vitamins and minerals, obtained through the consumption of a variety of foods, including green and orange vegetables, meat, fish, beans, nuts, whole grains and fruit (41). • Stakeholders may wish to consider culturally appropriate healthy eating and exercise interventions to prevent excessive weight gain in pregnancy, particularly for populations with a high prevalence of overweight and obesity, depending on resources and women’s preferences. Interventions should be woman-centred and delivered in a non-judgemental manner, and developed to ensure appropriate weight gain (see further information in points below). • A healthy lifestyle includes aerobic physical activity and strength-conditioning exercise aimed at maintaining a good level of fitness throughout pregnancy, without trying to reach peak fitness level or train for athletic competition. Women should choose activities with minimal risk of loss of balance and fetal trauma (42). • Most normal gestational weight gain occurs after 20 weeks of gestation and the definition of “normal” is subject to regional variations, but should take into consideration pre-pregnant body mass index (BMI). According to the Institute of Medicine classification (43), women who are underweight at the start of pregnancy (i.e. BMI < 18.5 kg/m2 ) should aim to gain 12.5–18 kg, women who are normal weight at the start of pregnancy (i.e. BMI 18.5–24.9 kg/m2 ) should aim to gain 11.5–16 kg, overweight women (i.e. BMI 25–29.9 kg/m2 ) should aim to gain 7–11.5 kg, and obese women(i.e. BMI > 30 kg/m2 ) should aim to gain 5–9 kg. • Most evidence on healthy eating and exercise interventions comes from high-income countries (HICs), and the GDG noted that that there are at least 40 ongoing trials in HICs in this field. The GDG noted that research is needed on the effects, feasibility and acceptability of healthy eating and exercise interventions in LMICs. • Pregnancy may be an optimal time for behaviour change interventions among populations with a high prevalence of overweight and obesity, and the longer-term impact of these interventions on women, children and partners needs investigation. • The GDG noted that a strong training package is needed for practitioners, including standardized guidance on nutrition. This guidance should be evidence-based, sustainable, reproducible, accessible and adaptable to different cultural settings.






Summary of evidence and considerations


 Effects of diet and exercise interventions compared with no diet and exercise interventions (EB Table A.1.1)


 The evidence on the effects of healthy eating and exercise interventions was derived from a Cochrane review that included 65 randomized controlled trials (RCTs), mostly conducted in HICs (44). Thirty-four trials recruited women from the general population (i.e. women of a wide range of BMIs at baseline), 24 trials recruited overweight and/or obese women and seven recruited women defined as being at high risk of gestational diabetes. In total, 49 RCTs involving 11 444 women contributed data to the review’s meta-analyses. Diet interventions were defined as a special selection of food or energy intake to which a participant was restricted, which were most commonly “healthy eating” types of diets. Exercise interventions were defined by reviewers as any activity requiring physical effort, carried out to sustain or improve health or fitness, and these were either prescribed/unsupervised (e.g. 30 minutes of daily walking), supervised (e.g. a weekly supervised group exercise class) or both. These interventions were usually compared with “standard ANC” and aimed to prevent excessive gestational weight gain (EGWG). Most trials recruited women between 10 and 20 weeks of gestation. There was substantial variation in the number of contacts (i.e. counselling/exercise sessions), type of intervention and method of delivery. Data were grouped according to the type of intervention (i.e. diet only, exercise only, diet and exercise counselling, diet and supervised exercise) and the average effects across trials were estimated using the random effects model. Separate analyses were performed according to type of intervention and the risk of weight-related complications. Most data in the overall analyses were derived from trials of combined diet and exercise interventions. Maternal outcomes High-certainty evidence shows that women receiving diet and/or exercise interventions as part of ANC to prevent EGWG are less likely to experience EGWG (24 trials, 7096 women; relative risk [RR]: 0.80, 95% confidence interval [CI]: 0.73–0.87; absolute effect of 91 fewer women with EGWG per 1000 on average). Subgroup analyses were consistent with these findings. High-certainty evidence shows that diet and/or exercise interventions have little or no effect on preeclampsia risk (15 trials, 5330 women; RR: 0.95, 95% CI: 0.77–1.16). However, moderate-certainty evidence indicates that diet and/or exercise interventions probably prevent hypertension in pregnancy (11 trials, 5162 women; RR: 0.70, 95% CI: 0.51–0.96). Low-certainty evidence suggests that diet and/or exercise interventions may have little or no effect on caesarean section (28 trials, 7534 women; RR: 0.95, 95% CI: 0.88–1.03); however, low-certainty evidence from the diet and exercise counselling subgroup of trials suggests that reductions in caesarean section rates may be possible with this intervention (9 trials, 3406 women; RR: 0.87, 95% CI: 0.75–1.01). Moderate-certainty evidence indicates that diet and/or exercise interventions probably make little or no difference to induction of labour (8 trials, 3832 women; RR: 1.06, 95% CI: 0.94–1.19). Low-certainty evidence suggests that diet and/ or exercise interventions may reduce the risk of gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) (19 trials, 7279 women; RR: 0.82, 95% CI: 0.67–1.01). Fetal and neonatal outcomes Moderate-certainty evidence suggests that diet and/or exercise interventions probably prevent neonatal macrosomia (27 trials, 8598 women; RR: 0.93, 95% CI: 0.86–1.02), particularly in overweight and obese women receiving diet and exercise counselling interventions (9 trials, 3252 neonates; RR: 0.85, 95% CI: 0.73–1.00). However, moderatecertainty evidence indicates that diet and exercise interventions probably have little or no effect on neonatal hypoglycaemia (4 trials, 2601 neonates; RR: 0.95, 95% CI: 0.76–1.18) or shoulder dystocia (4 trials, 3253 neonates; RR: 1.02, 95% CI: 0.57–1.83). Low-certainty evidence suggests that neonatal respiratory morbidity may occur less frequently with diet and exercise counselling interventions than controls, particularly among overweight and obese women (2 studies, 2256 women; RR: 0.47, 95% CI: 0.26–0.85). Low-certainty evidence suggests that diet and/or exercise interventions may have little or no effect on preterm birth (16 trials, 5923 women; RR: 0.91, 95% CI: 0.68–1.22), and the evidence on low-birth-weight neonates is very uncertain. Perinatal mortality was not reported in the review. Chapter 3. Evidence and recommendations 17 Additional considerations n High-certainty evidence from the review also shows that low gestational weight gain is more likely to occur with these interventions (11 trials, 4422 women; RR: 1.14, CI: 1.02–1.27); the clinical relevance of this finding is not known. n The effects, acceptability and feasibility of diet and exercise interventions in LMICs has not been established. Values Please see “Women’s values” in section 3.A: Background (p. 15). Resources Cost implications of diet and exercise interventions for health services are highly variable. For example, supervised diet and exercise interventions can have high associated costs, mainly due to staff costs for time spent supervising, while counselling interventions might have relatively low costs. For pregnant women, the interventions might also have resource implications in terms of transport costs, time off work and child-minding costs, particularly if the intervention requires additional antenatal visits. Equity Most of the evidence came from trials conducted in HICs. Recent studies have reported a shift in the burden of overweight and obesity from advantaged to disadvantaged populations (32). Such a trend increases the risk of associated pregnancy complications, as well as cardiometabolic problems, among pregnant women from disadvantaged populations. These risks might be further exacerbated among women in low-resource community settings, as these settings may not be equipped to deal with complications. Acceptability Qualitative evidence indicates that women in a variety of settings tend to view ANC as a source of knowledge and information and that they generally appreciate any advice (including dietary or nutritional) that may lead to a healthy baby and a positive pregnancy experience (high confidence in the evidence) (22). It also suggests that women may be less likely to engage with health services if advice is delivered in a hurried or didactic manner (high confidence in the evidence) (22). Therefore, these types of interventions are more likely to be acceptable if the interventions are delivered in an unhurried and supportive way, which may also facilitate better engagement with ANC services. Qualitative evidence on health-care providers’ views of ANC suggests that they may be keen to offer general health-care advice and specific pregnancy-related information (low confidence in the evidence) but they sometimes feel they do not have the appropriate training and lack the resources and time to deliver the service in the informative, supportive and caring manner that women want (high confidence in the evidence) (45). Feasibility In a number of LMIC settings, providers feel that a lack of resources may limit implementation of recommended interventions (high confidence in the evidence) (45).




























A.1.2: Nutrition education on energy and protein intake


RECOMMENDATION A.1.2: In undernourished populations, nutrition education on increasing daily energy and protein intake is recommended for pregnant women to reduce the risk of lowbirth-weight neonates. (Context-specific recommendation)


Remarks • Undernourishment is usually defined by a low BMI (i.e. being underweight). For adults, a 20–39% prevalence of underweight women is considered a high prevalence of underweight and 40% or higher is considered a very high prevalence (46). Mid-upper arm circumference (MUAC) may also be useful to identify protein–energy malnutrition in individual pregnant women and to determine its prevalence in this population (31). However, the optimal cut-off points may need to be determined for individual countries based on context-specific cost–benefit analyses (31). • Anthropometric characteristics of the general population are changing, and this needs to be taken into account by regularly reassessing the prevalence of undernutrition to ensure that the intervention remains relevant. • The GDG noted that a strong training package is needed for practitioners, including standardized guidance on nutrition. This guidance should be evidence-based, sustainable, reproducible, accessible and adaptable to different cultural settings. • Stakeholders might wish to consider alternative delivery platforms (e.g. peer counsellors, media reminders) and task shifting for delivery of this intervention. • Areas that are highly food insecure or those with little access to a variety of foods may wish to consider additional complementary interventions, such as distribution of balanced protein and energy supplements (see Recommendation A.1.3). Summary of evidence and considerations Effects of nutritional education to increase energy and protein intake versus no nutritional education intervention (EB Table A.1.2) Evidence on the effects of nutritional education was derived from a Cochrane review (47). Five trials conducted between 1975 and 2013 in Bangladesh, Greece and the USA, involving 1090 pregnant women, contributed data to this comparison. Nutritional education interventions were delivered one-to-one or in group classes and included education to improve the “quality” of diet, increase energy and protein intake, or improve knowledge of the nutritional value of different foods, including energy, protein, vitamins and iron. The Bangladesh study also involved cookery demonstrations. Maternal outcomes Evidence on gestational weight gain was of very low certainty. There was no other evidence available on maternal outcomes in the review for this comparison. Fetal and neonatal outcomes Low-certainty evidence shows that antenatal dietary education may reduce low-birth-weight neonates (300 women; RR: 0.04, 95% CI: 0.01–0.14), but may have little or no effect on small-for-gestational-age (SGA) neonates (2 trials, 449 women; RR: 0.46, 95% CI: 0.21–0.98), stillbirths (1 trial, 431 women; RR: 0.37, 95% CI: 0.07–1.90) or neonatal deaths (1 trial, 448 women; RR: 1.28, 95% CI: 0.35–4.72). Evidence on preterm birth was judged to be of very low certainty. Values Please see “Women’s values” in section 3.A: Background (p. 15). Resources Resource costs are variable and mainly related to staffing and counselling time. Equity In many LMICs, pregnancy outcomes and ANC coverage are worse among women who are poor, least educated and residing in rural areas (29). Many low-income countries still struggle with widespread poverty and hunger, particularly among rural populations (48). Findings from a study of antenatal food supplementation and micronutrient supplements in rural Bangladesh suggest that food supplementation interventions might be associated with better ANC adherence among women with Chapter 3. Evidence and recommendations 19 less education but not among those with more education (49). Therefore, providing antenatal food supplements could help to address inequalities by improving maternal nutritional status and increasing ANC coverage among disadvantaged women. Acceptability Qualitative evidence indicates that women in a variety of settings tend to view ANC as a source of knowledge and information and that they generally appreciate any advice (including dietary or nutritional) that may lead to a healthy baby and a positive pregnancy experience (high confidence in the evidence) (22). It also suggests that women may be less likely to engage with health services if advice is delivered in a hurried or didactic manner (high confidence in the evidence) (22). Therefore, these types of interventions are more likely to be acceptable if the interventions are delivered in an unhurried and supportive way, which may also facilitate better engagement with ANC services. Qualitative evidence on health-care providers’ views of ANC suggests that they may be keen to offer general health-care advice and specific pregnancy-related information (low confidence in the evidence) but they sometimes feel they do not have the appropriate training and lack the resources and time to deliver the service in the informative, supportive and caring manner that women want (high confidence in the evidence) (45). Feasibility In a number of LMIC settings, providers feel that a lack of resources may limit implementation of recommended interventions (high confidence in the evidence) (45).
















A.1.3: Energy and protein dietary supplements


RECOMMENDATION A.1.3: In undernourished populations, balanced energy and protein dietary supplementation is recommended for pregnant women to reduce the risk of stillbirths and smallfor-gestational-age neonates. (Context-specific recommendation)


Remarks • The GDG stressed that this recommendation is for populations or settings with a high prevalence of undernourished pregnant women, and not for individual pregnant women identified as being undernourished. • Undernourishment is usually defined by a low BMI (i.e. being underweight). For adults, a 20–39% prevalence of underweight women is considered a high prevalence of underweight and 40% or higher is considered a very high prevalence (46). MUAC may also be useful to identify protein–energy malnutrition in individual pregnant women and to determine its prevalence in this population (31). However, the optimal cut-off points may need to be determined for individual countries based on context-specific cost– benefit analyses (31). • Establishment of a quality assurance process is important to guarantee that balanced energy and protein food supplements are manufactured, packaged and stored in a controlled and uncontaminated environment. The cost and logistical implications associated with balanced energy and protein supplements might be mitigated by local production of supplements, provided that a quality assurance process is established. • A continual, adequate supply of supplements is required for programme success. This requires a clear understanding and investment in procurement and supply chain management. • Programmes should be designed and continually improved based on locally generated data and experiences. Examples relevant to this guideline include: – Improving delivery, acceptability and utilization of this intervention by pregnant women (i.e. overcoming supply and utilization barriers). – Distribution of balanced energy and protein supplements may not be feasible only through the local schedule of ANC visits; additional visits may need to be scheduled. The costs related to these additional visits should be considered. In the absence of antenatal visits, too few visits, or when the first visit comes too late, consideration should be given to alternative platforms for delivery (e.g. community health workers, task shifting in specific settings). – Values and preferences related to the types and amounts of balanced energy and protein supplements may vary. • Monitoring and evaluation should include evaluation of household-level storage facilities, spoilage, wastage, retailing, sharing and other issues related to food distribution. • Each country will need to understand the context-specific etiology of undernutrition at the national and sub-national levels. For instance, where seasonality is a predictor of food availability, the programme should consider this and adapt to the conditions as needed (e.g. provision of more or less food of different types in different seasons). In addition, a better understanding is needed of whether alternatives to energy and protein supplements – such as cash or vouchers, or improved local and national food production and distribution – can lead to better or equivalent results. • Anthropometric characteristics of the general population are changing, and this needs to be taken into account to ensure that only those women who are likely to benefit (i.e. only undernourished women) are included. • The GDG noted that it is not known whether there are risks associated with providing this intervention to women with a high BMI. Chapter 3. Evidence and recommendations 21 Summary of evidence and considerations Effects of balanced energy and protein supplements compared with no supplements or placebo (EB Table A.1.3) Evidence on the effects of balanced energy and protein supplements compared with no supplementation or placebo was derived from a Cochrane review (47). Twelve trials, involving 6705 women, were included in this comparison. Most data were derived from trials conducted in LMICs, including Burkina Faso, Colombia, Gambia, Ghana, India, Indonesia, South Africa and Taiwan, China. The balanced energy and protein supplements used were in various forms, including fortified beverages, biscuits and powders. Maternal outcomes The only maternal outcome reported for this comparison in the review, of those outcomes prioritized for this guideline, was pre-eclampsia. However, the evidence on this outcome, based on two small trials, was assessed as very uncertain. Fetal and neonatal outcomes Moderate-certainty evidence shows that balanced energy and protein supplementation probably reduces SGA neonates (7 trials, 4408 women; RR: 0.79, 95% CI: 0.69–0.90) and stillbirths (5 trials, 3408 women; RR: 0.60, 95% CI: 0.39–0.94), but probably has no effect on preterm birth (5 trials, 3384 women; RR: 0.96, 95% CI: 0.80–1.16). Lowcertainty evidence suggests that it may have little or no effect on neonatal deaths (5 trials, 3381 women; RR: 0.68, 95% CI: 0.43–1.07). Low birth weight was not reported for this comparison in the review. Additional considerations n In the review, mean birth weight (in grams) was reported and the findings favoured the balanced energy and protein supplementation group (11 trials, 5385 neonates; mean difference [MD]: 40.96, 95% CI: 4.66–77.26). This evidence was graded as moderate-quality evidence in the review (47). Values Please see “Women’s values” in section 3.A: Background (p. 15). Resources The cost of balanced energy and protein supplements is relatively high. There may also be cost implications with respect to transport, storage and training. Equity In many LMICs, pregnancy outcomes and ANC coverage are worse among women who are poor, least educated and residing in rural areas (29). Many low-income countries still struggle with widespread poverty and hunger, particularly among rural populations (48). Findings from a study of antenatal food supplementation and micronutrient supplements in rural Bangladesh suggest that food supplementation interventions might be associated with better ANC adherence among women with less education but not among those with more education (49). Therefore, providing antenatal food supplements could help to address inequalities by improving maternal nutritional status and increasing ANC coverage among disadvantaged women. Acceptability Qualitative evidence indicates that women in a variety of settings tend to view ANC as a source of knowledge and information and that they generally appreciate any advice (including dietary or nutritional) that may lead to a healthy baby and a positive pregnancy experience (high confidence in the evidence) (22). It also suggests that women may be less likely to engage with health services if advice is delivered in a hurried or didactic manner (high confidence in the evidence) (22). Therefore, these types of interventions are more likely to be acceptable if the interventions are delivered in an unhurried and supportive way, which may also facilitate better engagement with ANC services. Qualitative evidence on health-care providers’ views of ANC suggests that they may be keen to offer general health-care advice and specific pregnancy-related information (low confidence in the evidence) but they sometimes feel they do not have the appropriate training and lack the resources and time to deliver the service in the informative, supportive and caring manner that women want (high confidence in the evidence) (45). Feasibility Providing balanced protein and energy supplements may be associated with logistical issues, as supplements are bulky and will require adequate transport and storage facilities to ensure continual supplies. Qualitative evidence from LMIC settings indicates that providers feel that a lack of resources may limit implementation of recommended interventions (high confidence in the evidence) (45).























A.1.4: High-protein supplements


RECOMMENDATION A.1.4: In undernourished populations, high-protein supplementation is not recommended for pregnant women to improve maternal and perinatal outcomes. (Not recommended)


Remarks • The GDG noted that there is insufficient evidence on the benefits, if any, of high-protein supplementation. • Further research on the effects of high-protein supplements in undernourished populations is not considered a research priority. Summary of evidence and considerations Effects of high-protein supplementation compared with controls (EB Table A.1.4) Evidence on the effects of high-protein supplementation was derived from the same Cochrane review as for Recommendations A.1.2 and A.1.3 (47). The review included one trial of high-protein supplementation compared with a micronutrient supplement conducted in the 1970s, involving 1051 low-income, black women in the USA. Maternal outcomes None of the outcomes prioritized for this guideline were reported for this comparison in the review. Fetal and neonatal outcomes High-certainty evidence shows that high-protein supplementation increases SGA neonates (1 trial, 505 neonates; RR: 1.58, 95% CI: 1.03–2.41). Moderate-certainty evidence indicates that highprotein supplementation probably has little or no effect on preterm birth (1 study, 505 women; RR: 1.14, 95% CI: 0.83–1.56). Low-certainty evidence suggests that high-protein supplementation may have little or no effect on stillbirths (1 trial, 529 babies; RR: 0.81, 95% CI: 0.31–2.15; certainty of evidence downgraded due to imprecision) and neonatal deaths (1 trial, 529 neonates; RR: 2.78, 95% CI: 0.75–10.36). Values Please see “Women’s values” in section 3.A: Background (p. 15). Resources The cost of high-protein supplements is relatively high. There may also be cost implications with respect to transport, storage and training. Equity In many LMICs, pregnancy outcomes and ANC coverage are worse among women who are poor, least educated and residing in rural areas (29). Many low-income countries still struggle with widespread poverty and hunger, particularly among rural populations (48). Therefore, providing antenatal food supplements could help to address inequalities by improving maternal nutritional status and increasing ANC coverage among disadvantaged women. Acceptability Qualitative evidence indicates that women in a variety of settings tend to view ANC as a source of knowledge and information and that they generally appreciate any advice (including dietary or nutritional) that may lead to a healthy baby and a positive pregnancy experience (high confidence in the evidence) (22). It also suggests that women may be less likely to engage with health services if advice is delivered in a hurried or didactic manner (high confidence in the evidence) (22). Qualitative evidence on health-care providers’ views of ANC suggests that they may be keen to offer general health-care advice and specific pregnancy-related information (low confidence in the evidence) but they sometimes feel they do not have the appropriate training and lack the resources and time to deliver the service in the informative, supportive and caring manner that women want (high confidence in the evidence) (45). Feasibility Providing high-protein supplements may be associated with logistical issues, as supplements are bulky and will require adequate transport and storage facilities to ensure continual supplies. Qualitative evidence from LMIC settings indicates that providers feel that a lack of resources may limit implementation of recommended interventions (high confidence in the evidence) (45). Chapter 3. Evidence and recommendations 23




A.2: Iron and folic acid supplements


A.2.1: Daily iron and folic acid supplements


RECOMMENDATION A.2.1: Daily oral iron and folic acid supplementation with 30 mg to 60 mg of elemental irona and 400 µg (0.4 mg) folic acidb is recommended for pregnant women to prevent maternal anaemia, puerperal sepsis, low birth weight, and preterm birth.c (Recommended)


Remarks • This recommendation supersedes the 2012 WHO Guideline: daily iron and folic acid supplementation in pregnant women (36) and should be considered alongside Recommendation A.2.2 on intermittent iron. • In settings where anaemia in pregnant women is a severe public health problem (i.e. where at least 40% of pregnant women have a blood haemoglobin [Hb] concentration < 110 g/L), a daily dose of 60 mg of elemental iron is preferred over a lower dose. • In the first and third trimesters, the Hb threshold for diagnosing anaemia is 110 g/L; in the second trimester, the threshold is 105 g/L (50). • If a woman is diagnosed with anaemia during pregnancy, her daily elemental iron should be increased to 120 mg until her Hb concentration rises to normal (Hb 110 g/L or higher) (34, 51). Thereafter, she can resume the standard daily antenatal iron dose to prevent recurrence of anaemia. • Effective communication with pregnant women about diet and healthy eating – including providing information about food sources of vitamins and minerals, and dietary diversity – is an integral part of preventing anaemia and providing quality ANC. • Effective communication strategies are vital for improving the acceptability of, and adherence to, supplementation schemes. • Stakeholders may need to consider ways of reminding pregnant women to take their supplements and of assisting them to manage associated side-effects. • In areas with endemic infections that may cause anaemia through blood loss, increased red cell destruction or decreased red cell production, such as malaria and hookworm, measures to prevent, diagnose and treat these infections should be implemented. • Oral supplements are available as capsules or tablets (including soluble tablets, and dissolvable and modified-release tablets) (52). Establishment of a quality assurance process is important to guarantee that supplements are manufactured, packaged and stored in a controlled and uncontaminated environment (53). • A better understanding of the etiology of anaemia (e.g. malaria endemnicity, haemoglobinopathies) and the prevalence of risk factors is needed at the country level, to inform context-specific adaptations of this recommendation. • Standardized definitions of side-effects are needed to facilitate monitoring and evaluation. • Development and improvement of integrated surveillance systems are needed to link the assessment of anaemia and iron status at the country level to national and global surveillance systems. • To reach the most vulnerable populations and ensure a timely and continuous supply of supplements, stakeholders may wish to consider task shifting the provision of iron supplementation in community settings with poor access to health-care professionals (see Recommendation E.6.1, in section E: Health systems interventions to improve the utilization and quality of ANC). a The equivalent of 60 mg of elemental iron is 300 mg of ferrous sulfate hepahydrate, 180 mg of ferrous fumarate or 500 mg of ferrous gluconate. b Folic acid should be commenced as early as possible (ideally before conception) to prevent neural tube defects. c This recommendation supersedes the previous WHO recommendation found in the 2012 Guideline: daily iron and folic acid supplementation in pregnant women (36). WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience 24 Summary of evidence and considerations Effects of any daily iron and folic acid supplements compared with no daily iron and folic acid supplements (EB Table A.2.1) The evidence on the effects of daily iron and/or folic acid was derived from a Cochrane review of 61 trials conducted in low-, middle- and high-income countries (54). Twenty-three trials were conducted in countries with some malaria risk, of which two reported malaria outcomes. Overall, 44 trials involving 43 274 women contributed data to the review’s meta-analyses. The trials compared daily oral iron supplementation, with or without folic acid or other vitamin and mineral supplements, with various control groups (folic acid only, placebo, no intervention, other vitamin and mineral supplements without iron or folic acid). Most of the evidence was derived from studies comparing iron supplementation with no iron supplementation. In most trials, women began taking supplements before 20 weeks of gestation and continued taking supplements until delivery. The most commonly used dose of elemental iron was 60 mg daily (range: 30–240 mg) and that of folic acid was 400 µg daily. Maternal outcomes Anaemia was reported in many different ways and at different time points during pregnancy and the puerperium. Low-certainty evidence shows that daily iron supplementation may reduce the risk of anaemia at term (defined as blood Hb concentration < 110 g/L at 37 weeks of gestation or later) (14 trials, 2199 women; RR: 0.30, 95% CI: 0.19–0.46) and severe postpartum anaemia (defined as Hb < 80 g/L) (8 trials, 1339 women; RR: 0.04, 95% CI: 0.01–0.28). Low-certainty evidence also shows that daily iron supplementation may increase maternal Hb concentrations at or near term (34 weeks of gestation or more) (19 trials, 3704 women; MD: 8.88 g/L higher, 95% CI: 6.96–10.8 g/L) and may increase the proportion of women with a high maternal Hb at or near term (Hb > 130 g/L at 34 weeks of gestation or later) (8 trials, 2156 women; RR: 3.07, 95% CI: 1.18–8.02). Regarding maternal morbidity, moderate-certainty evidence shows that daily iron supplementation probably reduces the risk of maternal puerperal infections (4 trials, 4374 women; RR: 0.68, 95% CI: 0.5–0.92). Low-certainty evidence shows that daily iron supplementation may have little or no effect on pre-eclampsia (4 trials, 1704 women; RR: 1.63, 95% CI: 0.87–3.07) and antepartum haemorrhage (2 trials, 1157 women; RR: 1.48, 95% CI: 0.51–4.31), and moderate-certainty evidence shows that it probably has little or no effect on postpartum haemorrhage (4 trials, 1488 women; RR: 0.93, 95% CI: 0.59–1.49). Evidence on other morbidity outcomes, including placental abruption and blood transfusions, is of very low certainty. Low-certainty evidence shows that daily iron supplementation may have little or no effect on maternal mortality (2 trials, 12 560 women; RR: 0.33, 95% CI: 0.01–8.19). Women’s satisfaction was evaluated in one small trial (49 women), which found little difference between daily iron and control groups. Side-effects: Moderate-certainty evidence indicates that daily iron supplementation probably has little or no effect on the risk of experiencing any side-effect (11 trials, 2425 women; RR: 1.29, 95% CI: 0.83–2.02), and that it may have little or no effect on constipation (4 trials, 1495 women; RR: 0.95, 95% CI: 0.62–1.43), heartburn (3 trials, 1323 women; RR: 1.19, 95% CI: 0.86–1.66) and vomiting (4 trials, 1392 women; RR: 0.88, 95% CI: 0.59–1.30). Evidence that daily iron has little or no effect on nausea is of low certainty (4 trials, 1377 women; RR: 1.21, 95% CI: 0.72–2.03). High-certainty evidence shows that diarrhoea is less common with daily iron supplements (3 trials, 1088 women; RR: 0.55, 95% CI: 0.32–0.93). Fetal and neonatal outcomes Low-certainty evidence shows that daily iron may reduce the risk of low-birth-weight neonates (< 2500 g) (11 trials, 17 613 neonates; RR: 0.84, 95% CI: 0.69–1.03). High-certainty evidence shows that it does not reduce the risk of preterm birth before 37 weeks of gestation (13 trials, 19 286 women; RR: 0.93, 95% CI: 0.84–1.03), but it does reduce the risk of very preterm birth (i.e. less than 34 weeks of gestation) (5 trials, 3749 women; RR: 0.51, 95% CI: 0.29–0.91). Low-certainty evidence suggests that daily iron may have little or no effect on congenital anomalies (4 trials, 14 636 neonates; RR: 0.88, 95% CI: 0.58–1.33). Moderate-certainty evidence indicates that daily iron probably has little or no effect on neonatal deaths (4 trials, 16 603 neonates; RR: 0.91, 95% CI: 0.71–1.18). Neonatal infections and SGA were not reviewed as outcomes






Additional considerations n Evidence from subgroups tended to be consistent with the overall findings for the main outcomes. More details can be found in the Web supplement (EB Table A.2.1). Values Please see “Women’s values” in section 3.A: Background (p. 15). Resources Daily iron and folic acid supplements are relatively low cost, at less than 1 United States dollar (US$ 1) per pregnant woman (27). Equity Iron deficiency and parasitic infections are more common in LMICs and disadvantaged populations. Poor, rural and least-educated populations also experience the highest maternal, infant and child mortality (29). Increasing coverage of effective nutritional interventions to prevent anaemia, particularly among disadvantaged populations, might help to address maternal and newborn health inequalities. Acceptability Qualitative evidence suggests that the availability of iron supplements may actively encourage women to engage with ANC providers (low confidence in the evidence) (22). However, where there are additional costs associated with supplementation or where the supplements may be unavailable (because of resource constraints) women are less likely to engage with ANC services (high confidence in the evidence). Lower doses of iron may be associated with fewer side-effects and therefore may be more acceptable to women than higher doses. Feasibility Qualitative evidence about the views of health-care providers suggests that resource constraints, both in terms of the availability of the supplements and the lack of suitably trained staff to deliver them, may limit implementation (high confidence in the evidence) (45). a The equivalent of 120 mg of elemental iron is 600 mg of ferrous sulfate hepahydrate, 360 mg of ferrous fumarate or 1000 mg of ferrous gluconate.




 A.2.2: Intermittent iron and folic acid supplements


RECOMMENDATION A.2.2: Intermittent oral iron and folic acid supplementation with 120 mg of elemental irona and 2800 µg (2.8 mg) of folic acid once weekly is recommended for pregnant women to improve maternal and neonatal outcomes if daily iron is not acceptable due to sideeffects, and in populations with an anaemia prevalence among pregnant women of less than 20%. (Context-specific recommendation)


Remarks • This recommendation supersedes the previous WHO recommendation in the 2012 Guideline: intermittent iron and folic acid supplementation in non-anaemic pregnant women (55) and should be considered alongside Recommendation A.1.1. • In general, anaemia prevalence of less than 20% is classified as a mild public health problem (33). • Before commencing intermittent iron supplementation, accurate measurement of maternal blood Hb concentrations is needed to confirm the absence of anaemia. Therefore, this recommendation may require a strong health system to facilitate accurate Hb measurement and to monitor anaemia status throughout pregnancy. • If a woman is diagnosed with anaemia (Hb < 110 g/L) during ANC, she should be given 120 mg of elemental iron and 400 µg (0.4 mg) of folic acid daily until her Hb concentration rises to normal (Hb 110 g/L or higher) (34, 51). Thereafter, she can continue with the standard daily antenatal iron and folic acid dose (or the intermittent regimen if daily iron is not acceptable due to side-effects) to prevent recurrence of anaemia. • Stakeholders may need to consider ways of reminding pregnant women to take their supplements on an intermittent basis and of assisting them to manage associated side-effects. WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience 26 Summary of evidence and considerations Effects of intermittent iron and folic acid supplements compared with daily iron and folic acid supplements (EB Table A.2.2) The evidence on the effects of intermittent iron and folic acid was derived from a Cochrane review that included 27 trials from 15 countries; however, only 21 trials (involving 5490 women) contributed data to the review’s meta-analyses (56). All trials were conducted in LMICs with some degree of malaria risk (Argentina, Bangladesh, China, Guatemala, India, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Malawi, Malaysia, Mexico, Pakistan, Republic of Korea, Sri Lanka, Thailand and Viet Nam); however, only one trial specifically reported that it was conducted in a malaria-endemic area. Most of the intermittent iron regimens involved women taking weekly supplements, most commonly 120 mg elemental iron per week (range: 80–200 mg weekly), which was compared with daily regimens, most commonly 60 mg elemental iron daily (range: 40–120 mg daily). Where folic acid was also provided in the trials, it was administered weekly in the intermittent supplement groups (range: 400– 3500 µg weekly) compared with the usual standard daily dose for control groups. Maternal outcomes Anaemia was reported in different ways across trials. Low-certainty evidence suggests there may be little or no difference between intermittent and daily iron supplementation in the effect on anaemia at term (4 trials, 676 women; RR: 1.22, 95% CI: 0.84–1.80). Moderate-certainty evidence shows that anaemia at or near term (defined as a Hb of < 110 g/L at 34 weeks of gestation or later) probably occurs more frequently with intermittent than daily iron supplementation (8 trials, 1385 women; RR: 1.66, 95% CI: 1.09–2.53), and that intermittent iron supplementation is probably less likely to be associated with a Hb concentration of more than 130 g/L than daily iron (15 trials, 2616 women; RR: 0.53, 95% CI: 0.38–0.74). No events of severe anaemia occurred in either group in six trials reporting this outcome (1240 women). The evidence on mean Hb concentrations at or near term and severe postpartum anaemia is of very low certainty. Limited evidence on maternal morbidity from one small trial (110 women) was assessed as very uncertain. Maternal infections and maternal satisfaction were not evaluated in the review. Side-effects: Moderate-certainty evidence shows that intermittent iron supplementation is probably less commonly associated with nausea than daily iron supplementation (7 trials, 1034 women; RR: 0.60, 95% CI: 0.37–0.97). However, the evidence on other specific side-effects (constipation, diarrhoea, heartburn or vomiting) or any side-effect is of very low certainty. Fetal and neonatal outcomes Low-certainty evidence suggests that intermittent iron supplementation may have a similar effect to daily iron supplementation on low birth weight (< 2500 g) (8 trials, 1898 neonates; RR: 0.82, 95% CI: 0.50–1.22). However, the evidence on preterm birth and very preterm birth was assessed as very uncertain. Evidence on the relative effects of intermittent versus daily iron supplementation on neonatal mortality is also very uncertain. Neonatal infections and SGA outcomes were not included in the review. Values Please see “Women’s values” in section 3.A: Background (p. 15). Resources Intermittent iron and folic acid supplementation might cost a little less than daily iron and folic acid supplementation due to the lower total weekly dose of iron. Equity Intermittent iron and folic acid supplementation may have less impact on health inequalities than daily iron and folic acid supplementation, as anaemia is more common in disadvantaged populations. Acceptability Qualitative evidence suggests that the availability of iron supplements may actively encourage women to engage with ANC providers (low confidence in the evidence) (22). However, where there are additional costs associated with supplementation or where the supplements may be unavailable (because of resource constraints) women are less likely to engage with ANC services (high confidence in the evidence). Women may find intermittent iron supplementation more acceptable than daily iron supplementation, particularly if they experience side-effects with daily iron supplements. Feasibility Intermittent iron may be more feasible in some lowresource settings if it costs less than daily iron.